war on Gaza comes on the 106th
anniversary of the ball declaration
which changed the lives of Palestinians
forever so it was that declaration well
for centuries the Ottoman Empire
controlled Palestine until it was
conquered in 197 by advancing British
troops during the first World War the
British foreign secretary ARA balur
wrote a letter to a prominent member of
the British Jewish Community saying his
government was in favor of the EST
lishment of a in Palestine of a national
home for the Jewish people well at that
time only 8% of palestine's population
was Jewish the letter also said nothing
shall be done which may Prejudice the
civil and religious rights of existing
non-jewish communities in Palestine but
after the war ended in 1918 the newly
created League of Nations mandated
Palestine to British control with the
language of the balfor Declaration
written in it
and in
1948 after the second world war British
occupiers left Palestine the newly
formed United Nations declared the
creation of the state of Israel more
than
700,000 Palestinians lost their
land mahjub zi joins us here in the
studio he's a professor of Middle East
politics at Qatar University good to
have you with us so when you look back
on this it's hard not to say that Bal
for laid the foundation of conflict in
the Middle East isn't it absolutely Sami
there are three major events if you put
them together they basically lay down
the whole issue of what soal total
Palestinian cause one is uh bord
declaration
1917 and before that was sepu agreement
1916 and the last one was Simo agreement
in 1920 those three events together they
put the what soal today the idea of of
having a a home for Jewish in in in
Palestine uh the Declaration itself is
fascinating because uh um the British
they have no right no control in
Palestine they gave what they don't have
to to to people they to the people they
don't have the right actually to to uh
uh occupy the land so that was
significant but at that time we have to
remember there were three main powers at
that time Russia British and the French
and and the and the three count together
they have all of those arrangements
behind the closing door and we found out
later about them looking at it the ball
Declaration was it really a colonial
project a European colonial power
promising to give a land to a movement
primarily comprised and led by European
non-natives yeah the the the idea was a
clear Sam at that time the debate in
Europe was about how to divide the
Legacy over what so-called the sick man
of Europe which Ottoman Empire at that
time and the debate was very clear how
can the three countries divide that
Legacy in a way that serves Colonial
interest not in a way that really
serves the context is colonization those
three forces the three power are a
colonized power and they divided the
land of what so-called the Levant in
that context and they live they left pal
Palestine in a way that in a without a
political uh status so they can
facilitate the project of establishing
uh state for Jew it's a jarring contrast
to the very high anti-immigrant
sentiment sweeping the UK and European
countries when you look back and see
actually they open the door at that time
they open the door they facilitate for
mainly a lot of
Europeans to go and establish a state
something definitely European powers
wouldn't like to see anything along
those
alone just immigrants coming to live
peacefully let alone establish a state
in you know in the second week of this
uh uh battle now uh the um I think uh
the the one of the secretaries in the UK
was asked by the media um out of the
media Outlet about whether they would
allow gazam people to come to the UK he
couldn't say yes he said UK is different
UK and he was actually escaping from the
answer so it was obvious that you know
the double stand stand it's was okay for
us to give away for Middle easterners to
have to accept we wouldn't want even
one% of nothing can can describe this
but the dehumanization and disrespect to
the others nothing can be understand do
you think the current UK government is
living up to its moral
obligations given this history when you
look at the positions taken by Rishi
sonak the Prime Minister it was obvious
that um since the the UK basically left
the European Union everything is is is
falling apart economically politically
and Corona has you know did have a great
impact did did did affect all of this
it's obvious that there's a lot of
debate now about the UK when it comes to
the foreign policy they are following
the Americans 100% And and there is also
economic problems and there's a lot of
debate about where the UK is going with
all of this uh you know this Legacy of
being a colonized power since we're
talking about countries failing to live
up to their moral obligations we got to
talk about an
interesting development that happened we
saw one Arab
country um withdraw its Ambassador for
Israel but we've seen three South
American countries withdraw their
ambassadors or cut relations Is there
also something to be said about the
jarring contrast here about and the
weakness of the Arab diplomatic
absolutely I mean those countries who
have a diplomatic ties with Israel they
have a perception of what's happened in
in Gaza the perception is Hamas is
involved and Hamas what's Hamas Hamas is
an Islamic movement ham is to the Muslim
Brotherhood and the and those countries
they already looked at Muslim as
terrorist organization so it's about a
perception and which dominate the
political decisions Palestinian people
are much bigger than absolutely I mean
it's obvious the PLO was rejected uh
Communists were rejected liberals were
rejected it's the idea of resistance
resistance is not accepted is rejected
and as long as someone resisting even if
he's a liberal he will be rejected right
all right thank you so much M coming
in